Append-Only logs were not originally created for stream processing.
In fact, almost every developer is already using
append only log today but they're likely just not even aware of it.
Years ago, SQL database developers need to develop a way to keep track of changes to
databases so that they could be synched to read
replicas from the primary read write node.
So just to reiterate,
in most SQL clusters,
you'll have one SQL database node which is servicing
all requests from clients such as micro services and others.
You'll have secondary nodes that will take over if the primary node were to fail.
But one of the problems is how do you keep the data in
sync between the primary and the secondaries?
What happens if data is lost as it's being synched?
Developers for these database systems hit upon the idea of keeping an append-only log
behind the scenes that track
the exact events that were taking place on the primary database.
The idea is simple, every time an update creation or deletion took place,
the database would sequentially right that action out to a log.
That log would then be replicated to each of
the read replicas which would modify their data in exactly the same fashion.
This provided guarantees that the read replicas would
contain identical state to the primary node.
For those of you who have used Postgres,
this is what is known as the write-ahead log or wall.
Specifically, this process is typically referred to as Change Data Capture,
otherwise known as CDC.
So SQL database is already implemented in append-only log,
why aren't they viable streaming data stores?
Well, because SQL databases don't actually surface the
append-only log in a consumable fashion for stream processing applications.
SQL databases do not actually store the data.
They use at runtime and append-only logs.
The wall and other forms of
CDC are purpose-built for replication and for replication only.